---
title: <i>The obstacle is the way</i> by Ryan holiday is a shallow
tags: []
---

Tl, DR: 🤨😠📕🗑️

Book contains some good ideas, the recommendations to implement them are bad. 
The book is about how to overcome obstacles by embracing them. 

These are the kind of suggestions which are easy to phrase, but difficult to set in practice.
The value in the book would be in how to grow the mindset to act on the suggestions.
The strategy of the author is a common one in business book.
Provide lots of cherry picked examples from famous people in history (mostly white men) and twist their story to fit their message.
This is not useful, as you might feel inspired in the moment, but can't related that kind of experience in an ordinary life.
If you take the "inspiring" examples away, most of the book can be summarized in just a few lines.   
1. **Perception** Try to see obstacles as opportunities.
Alter your perception to stay in control of your emotion and focus on what you can do.
(61 pages)
2. **Action** Embrace failure. (62 pages)
3. **Will** Develop will power. (57 pages)

These suggestions require discipline.
Acquiring the discipline is the difficult part, the book does't help with it.


## Survivorship bias, this stranger

Ryan falls for the common pitfall for survivorship bias.
That is: pick some situations where someone succeeded and cherry pick some aspect that supposedly was the reason of their success.
Ignore people that failed, even though they applied the same strategy.
Ignore that even when doing everything right, in many field there is a luck component.
Here are some notable instances of survivorship bias.

The message is a common one.
If you don't succeed at what you want, it's because you don't have the right mindset / skill / willpower.
This is a damaging idea: either you have the guts to be successful, or you don't
There is no space fot growth mindset or having failure as part of the process.

**George Clooney**
The world of acting is brutal.
There are many more people that want to act, than acting places.
Even the best actors might need years for their breakthrough, if it ever comes.
George Clooney failed many auditions before thriving.
Apparently, he just need "a new perspective" to be considered.
After he embraced "the new perspective", everything started working magically.
Even if this is the case, George Clooney still needed to perform auditions.
He still needed to stick to them when not considered.
He still needed to act good.
But apparently, all the actors who don't make just don't have the right perspective[^george].

**Business founded during financial downturns**
At p. 45 Ryan lists a bunch of companies during financial downturns, like Microsoft (recession in 1973--1975) and LinedIn (2002, post dot come bubble).
Apparently "[...] these businesses had little awareness they ere in some historically significant depression.
Why? Because the founders were too busy existing in the present -- actually dealing with the situation at hand. [...]".
What about all the companies that went bankrupt?
Were all of their founders no living in the present?
Where were they living?
Apparently the [New Deal](https://www.britannica.com/event/New-Deal) was unnecessary.
Franklin Delano Roosevelt could have saved just a bunch of taxpayers' money by inspiring Americans to "live in the present".

**World war two**
Apparently the right perception allows you to win battles.
"In the weeks and months after the successful invasion of Normandy by Allied forces, they faced [the blitzkrieg] again: a set of massive German counteroffensives. How could they stop it[^eisenhower]."
According to Ryan, only the American general General Dwight D. Eisenhower "answered that question".
Every other Allied force was just staying there without contributing to the discussion.
"[...] Eisenhower was able to see the tactical solution that had been in front of them the entire time: [...]: the Nazi strategy carried its own destruction within itself.
Only then were the Allies able to see the opportunity *inside* the obstacle rather than simply the obstacle that threatened them."
Forget that the Germans were losing the war since the [battle of Stalingrad](https://www.britannica.com/event/Battle-of-Stalingrad).
Eisenhower's perspective won the war.
Bullshit.
What about the [battle of Monte Cassino](https://www.britannica.com/topic/Battle-of-Monte-Cassino), when the Allies face many more causalities than the Nazis?
Maybe Eisenhower was at the bathroom when the Monte Cassino monastery was flattened by U.S. bombers.
Maybe that time just the Germans saw the *opportunity inside the obstacle* by defending among the ruins.


## Praise the asshole, praise the nazi
- Steve jobs
- Rommel


## Conclusion

Examples are supposed to help.
Just believe and stuck to it is not good advice.
How do you go from "I understand the concept" to "I develop the mindset to act on it".
Examples are not good and not relatable.
Book is not actionable.

The author made another book, *Trust me, I'm lying*. That one is good.


## Footnotes
[^george]: *page 39* Everything changed for Clooney when he tried a new perspective. [...] He wasn't going to be someone groveling for a shot. He was someone wth something special to offer. He was the answer to their prayers, not the other way around. That was what he began projecting in his auditions -- not exclusively his acting skills but that he was the man for the job. [...]
[^eisenhower]: *page 54*
