---
title: <i>The obstacle is the way</i> by Ryan holiday is a shallow and unhelpful
tags: []
---

Tl, DR: ðŸ¤¨ðŸ˜ ðŸ“•ðŸ—‘ï¸

I recently got *The obstacle is the way* by Ryan Holiday, and it was awful.
The book is about how to overcome difficulties by embracing them.
While the ideas are good, the narrative on how to act them is flawed.

The book is divided in three parts, which can be summarized as:
1. **Perception** Try to see obstacles as opportunities.
Alter your perception to stay in control of your emotions and focus on what you can do.
(61 pages)
2. **Action** Embrace failure. See it as a part of the process. (62 pages)
3. **Will** Develop will power. It must be built up to be available when needed. (57 pages)

The main ideas are easy to phrase, difficult to practice, and could fit on a few pages.
How to act on the ideas is the difficult part, which Holiday fails to present. 
The book is filled with cherry-picks stories (mostly about white men) which might seem inspiring, but are not actionable.
Cherry picking examples and twisting history is a common strategy in business book, and fails in this one too.

Most of the examples are unrelatable, you are not a US president, nor a Fortune 500 CEO, nor a World War 2 general.
What they supposedly did in certain situations decades or centuries ago is irrelevant for our choices.
Here are some notable instances of bad examples.


## Survivorship bias everywhere

Survivorship bias occurs when only available information is considered and the rest is discarded.
E.g.: consider only successful businesses, whatever they did is good, with the implicit assumption that none of the unsuccessful business did the same.
The result is a tautology: -
- successful business are successful because they take make successful decisions,
- they make successful decisions because they are successful businesses.

When applied on personal decisions it becomes a dangerous idea.
If you don't succeed at what you want, it's because you don't have the right mindset / skill / willpower.
There is no room for a growth mindset, either you have the guts or you don't.
The truth is that sometimes you can do everything right and still fail.
While Holiday dedicates some sections about recognizing failure as an acceptable outcome, most of the examples are phrased as the great white man leading with the right choice at the right time unlike everyone else.

**George Clooney**
The world of acting is brutal: there are many more aspiring actors than available acting careers.
Even the best actors might need years for their breakthrough, if it ever comes.
As other actors, George Clooney failed many auditions before thriving.
According to Holiday, "a new perspective"[^george] was all he needed to be considered.
After he embraced the "new perspective", everything started working magically.

This is a simplistic view with a circular logic.
Failing auditions is because the perspective is wrong, succeeding auditions is because the perspective is right.
Whatever the perspective at the time of a successful audition is the right one, all the other times is wrong.  

No matter which perspective was actually used by Clooney, that could have never been enough.
He still needed to stick to the auditions when not considered.
He still needed to act good.
But apparently, all the actors who don't make just don't have the right "perspective".

**Business founded during financial downturns**
At p. 45 Holiday lists a bunch of companies during financial downturns, like Microsoft (recession in 1973--1975) and LinedIn (2002, post dot come bubble).
According to him:
> [...] these businesses had little awareness they ere in some historically significant depression.
> Why? Because the founders were too busy existing in the present -- actually dealing with the situation at hand. [...]".

Here is again the circular logic and the simplistic view: 
- businesses thrive, therefore their founders are "busy existing in the present", 
- the founders are "busy existing in the present", therefore the businesses thrive.

By definition a financial downturn affects the entire economy.
Businesses must carry some entrepreneurial risk and some of them will go bankrupt no matter what.

Are all bankruptcies all because of founders not "busy existing in the present"?
Apparently the [New Deal](https://www.britannica.com/event/New-Deal) was unnecessary.
Franklin Delano Roosevelt could have saved just a bunch of taxpayers' money by inspiring Americans to be "busy existing in the present".

**World war two**
Apparently the right perception also allows you to win battles[^eisenhower].
> In the weeks and months after the successful invasion of Normandy by Allied forces, they faced [the blitzkrieg] again: a set of massive German counteroffensives. How could they stop it?

According to Holiday, only the American general General Dwight D. Eisenhower "answered that question".
Every other Allied force was just standing there without contributing to the discussion.

> [...] Eisenhower was able to see the tactical solution that had been in front of them the entire time: [...]: the Nazi strategy carried its own destruction within itself.
> Only then were the Allies able to see the opportunity *inside* the obstacle rather than simply the obstacle that threatened them.

Forget that the Germans were losing the war since the [battle of Stalingrad](https://www.britannica.com/event/Battle-of-Stalingrad).
Eisenhower's perspective won the war.
Bullshit.

What about the [battle of Monte Cassino](https://www.britannica.com/topic/Battle-of-Monte-Cassino), when the Allies faced many more causalities than the Nazis?
Was Eisenhower at the bathroom when the Monte Cassino monastery was flattened by U.S. bombers?
Maybe that time just the Germans saw the "opportunity inside the obstacle" by defending among the ruins.

Even by taking this narrative at face value, how is it supposed to be relatable?
The message turns down to: "find opportunity where there is adversity".
If it were that easy, this and several other books wouldn't exist in the first place.


## Taking example from the wrong people

**Steve Jobs**
Every business book has to claim that Steve Jobs was a genius and everything Apple does is great.
Holiday consequently includes a chapter titled *Think Differently*[^stevejobs].

> [...] in the design stages for a new mouse for an early Apple product, Jobs had high expectations.
He wanted it to move fluidly in any direction, [...] but a lead engineer was told by one of his designers that this would be commercially impossible. [...]
> The next day, [...] Steve Jobs had fired the employee who'd said that.

I'm fine praising Steve Jobs entrepreneurship.
He definitely was smart, that does not mean everything he did was right.
In ths instance, Steve Jobs was an asshole.
The designer must have had his reasons to claim the commercial unfeasibility of the mouse.
Steve Jobs could have improved his *perspective* by talking to the designer.
He could have tried to understand his reasons, allow him to challenge his assumptions and grow.
Instead he just replaced him with a yes man.
If an employee is supposed to have the right *perspective*, why does the same not apply to who's in charge?
This is a double standard: a complaining employee is always wrong, a complaining Steve Jobs is always right.
A toxic work culture does not mean the boss is a visionary.

**Erwin Rommel**
The worst part of the book is the [Rommel myth](https://encyclopedia.ushmm.org/content/en/article/erwin-rommel) shown as a positive example.
Holiday's narrative could come directly from Nazi propaganda[^rommel1]:
> [German Fiel Marshal General Erwin Rommel] saw war as a game. A dangerous, reckless, untidy, fast-paced game. And, most important, he took to this game with incredible energy and was perennially pushing his troops forward.
>
> The German troops has a saying about him: Where Rommel is, there is the front.
>
> That's the next steps: ramming your feet into te stirrups an really *going* for it.

And worse[^rommel2]:
> Rommel knew from history that those who attack problem and life with the most initiative and energy usually win. He was always pushing ahead, keeping the stampede on the more cautious British forces to devastating effect.

And again, in another chapter[^rommel3]:
> Rommel, for instance, was renowned for his *Frontierfahrung*, his sixth sense for the decisive point in battle. He had an acute ability to feel--even in the heat of the moment--the precise instance when going on the offensive would be the most effective. It's what allowed him to, repeatedly and often unbelievably, snatch victory from the jaws of defeat.

There is a part where Holiday tries to recontextualizes the myth, by claiming that Rommel's successes were actually part of the Allied strategy from the beginning[^rommel4]:
> Remember Erwin Rommel and the quick work he made of the British and American forces in North Africa? There is another part to that story. The Allied forces actually choose that disadvantageous battlefield on purpose. Churchill knew that they would have to take their first stand against the German somewhere, but to do that *and* lose in Europe would be disastrous for morale.
>
> In North Africa, the British learned how to fight the Germans--and early on they learned mostly by failure. But that was acceptable, because they'd anticipated a learning curve and planned for it. [...]

This is not enough.
You can't just praise a Nazi general by pretending the Allies were outsmarting him the whole time.
If the book had just contained unhelpful examples, I would have forgotten it like many others.
When reading Rommel's praise, I knew I was going to write a blog post about this book.
I could no longer keep my opinion to myself after reading such a steaming pile of bullshit.


## Conclusion

Examples are supposed to help.
Just believe and stuck to it is not good advice.
How do you go from "I understand the concept" to "I develop the mindset to act on it".
Most of the book is framed as "just find a way to turn a bad situation in a good situation.
Examples are not good and not relatable.
Book is not actionable.
I recommend atomic habits, more useful.

The author made another book, *Trust me, I'm lying*. That one is good.
Also *Conspiracy*.


## Footnotes
[^george]: *page 39* "Everything changed for Clooney when he tried a new perspective. [...] He wasn't going to be someone groveling for a shot. He was someone wth something special to offer. He was the answer to their prayers, not the other way around. That was what he began projecting in his auditions -- not exclusively his acting skills but that he was the man for the job. [...]"
[^eisenhower]: *page 54*
[^stevejobs]: *page 49*
[^worstcase]: *page 140*
[^rommel1]: *page 73*
[^rommel2]: *page 74*
[^rommel3]: *page 121*
[^rommel4]: *page 85*
